# Bird Song Generator
Generates bird songs using a mechanical model of the bird vocal box and hidden markov models.

### Making the virtual chirps (syllables) 
Laje and Mindlin (2002) in [Diversity within a birdsong](http://www.lsd.df.uba.ar/papers/diversity.pdf) describe two mathematical models. The first models part of the bird brain (Eq. 1 and Fig. 1 in the paper) responsible for sending commands to the motor centers that control singing. The second model represents a mechanical model of the syrinx (Eq. 2 in the paper) which is the sound producing apparatus in the bird.  Together these can generate virtual bird chirps.

In the Code directory, the birdBrain.m file is a differential equation solver that models the bird brain portion while the syrinx.m is a solver that models airflow through the syrinx as driven by the output generated by the bird brain model. The file singSyllable.m strings these two models together and gives the bird brain model an initial condition to start from. The output of running this file with a specific initial condition is a waveform that can be played directly from the speakers of a computer and sounds like a bird chirp. 

The RunParameterSpace.m file calls singSyllable.m file multiple times with different initial conditions to make different sounding chirps. The choice of the parameter that is changed is explained by Fig. 2a in Laje and Mindlin (2002). 

### Clustering the chirps 
PickOutSyllables.m goes through all of the bird chirps generated by running the model through the parameter space and then picks out just the syllables and forgoes the empty portions of the waveform. The chirps are then clustered by AnalyzeSpectrogram.m which uses the correlation in the spectrogram (time-varying frequency) of the bird chirps as a similarity metric. 

### Creating the virtual bird songs 
The final part of the code strings together sequences of chirps or syllables to create birdsongs. Researchers have used markov models and hidden markov models (HMM) to describe the specfic sequence of syllables in the [songs of real birds](http://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0024516). CreateHMMSongModel.m first creates a random HMM which is similar to the ones trained from real data by researchers. Then uses the randomly generated HMM to create sequences of bird chirps which make a song and can also string together multiple songs to make an entire bird song composition. 

### Bird song symphony 
This was used to create bird songs from many different "virtual birds" and then placed together in a place with stereo sound to create a [Bird symphony](https://soundcloud.com/user-287249838/bird-symphony) on a SoundCloud account. 
